Minneriya National Park (Sinhala: මින්නේරිය ජාතික වනෝද්‍යානය, romanized: Minnēriya Jātika Vanōdyānaya; Tamil: மின்னேரியா தேசிய வனம், romanized: Miṉṉēriyā Tēciya Vaṉam) is a national park in North Central Province of Sri Lanka. The area was designated as a national park on 12 August 1997, having been originally declared as a wildlife sanctuary in 1938.[1] The reason for declaring the area as protected is to protect the catchment of Minneriya tank and the wildlife of the surrounding area. The tank is of historical importance, having been built by King Mahasen in third century AD. The park is a dry season feeding ground for the elephant population dwelling in forests of Matale, Polonnaruwa, and Trincomalee districts. The park earned revenue of Rs. 10.7 million in the six months ending in August 2009.[2] Along with Kaudulla and Girithale, Minneriya forms one of the 70 Important Bird Areas (IBAs) of Sri Lanka.[3] The park is situated 182 kilometres (113 mi) from Colombo.




The Gal Vihara (Sinhala: ගල් විහාර), and originally as the Uttararama (Sinhala: උත්තරාම), is a rock temple of the Buddha situated in the ancient city of Polonnaruwa in North Central Province, Sri Lanka. It was fashioned in the 12th century by Parakramabahu I. The central feature of the temple is four rock relief statues of the Buddha, which have been carved into the face of a large granitic (granite gneiss) rock. The images consist of a large seated figure, another smaller seated figure inside an artificial cavern, a standing figure and a reclining figure. These are considered to be some of the best examples of ancient Sinhalese sculpting and carving arts, and have made the Gal Vihara the most visited monument at Polonnaruwa.The images of Uttararama follow a different style from the images of the previous Anuradhapura period, and show some significant differences. The identity of the standing image is subject to a certain amount of dispute among historians and archaeologists, some of whom argue that it depicts the monk Ananda rather than the Buddha. Each of the images have been carved in a way that uses a maximum possible area of the rock, and their heights seem to have been decided based on the height of the rock itself. Each statue appears to have had its own image house, as indicated by the remains of brick walls at the site. The Uttararama was where Parakramabahu I held a congregation of monks to purify the Buddhist priesthood, and later drew up a code of conduct for them. This code of conduct has been recorded in an inscription on the same rock face containing the images of the Buddha.



The Polonnaruwa Vatadage is an ancient structure dating back to the Kingdom of Polonnaruwa of Sri Lanka. It is believed to have been built during the reign of Parakramabahu I to hold the Relic of the tooth of the Buddha or during the reign of Nissanka Malla of Polonnaruwa to hold the alms bowl used by the Buddha. Both these venerated relics would have given the structure a great significance and importance at the time. Located within the ancient city of Polonnaruwa, it is the best preserved example of a vatadage in the country, and has been described as the "ultimate development" of this type of architecture. Abandoned for several centuries, excavation work at the Polonnaruwa Vatadage began in 1903.Built for the protection of a small stupa, the structure has two stone platforms decorated with elaborate stone carvings. The lower platform is entered through a single entrance facing the north, while the second platform can be accessed through four doorways facing the four cardinal points. The upper platform, surrounded by a brick wall, contains the stupa. Four Buddha statues are seated around it, each facing one of the entrances. Three concentric rows of stone columns had also been positioned here, presumably to support a wooden roof. The entire structure is decorated with stone carvings. Some of the carvings at the Polonnaruwa Vatadage, such as its sandakada pahanas, are considered to be the best examples of such architectural features. Although some archaeologists have suggested that it also had a wooden roof, this theory is disputed by others.



Parakrama Samudra (or King Parakrama's sea or the Sea of King Parakrama) is a shallow reservoir (wewa), consisting of five separate wewa (reservoirs) (thopa, dumbutulu, erabadu, bhu, kalahagala tanks) connected by narrow channels in Polonnaruwa, Sri Lanka.The northernmost reservoir is the oldest and referred to as Topa wewa (Sinhalese wewa is almost equal to English word lake or reservoir, but used unique Sri Lankan technology) built around 386 AD.[1] The middle section Eramudu wewa and the southernmost portion, at the highest elevation, is Dumbutula wewa, both sections were added and the reservoir expanded during the reign of King Parâkramabâhu I.[2] This wewa (reservoir) was built under the quote "do not let even a drop of rainwater in this country to go to the sea without use". The wewa (reservoir) was so large it was called Samudhraya which means "the ocean".


Nissanka Latha Mandapaya (Sinhala: නිශ්ශංක ලතා මණ්ඩපය) is a unique structure in the ancient city of Polonnaruwa in Sri Lanka. A màndapa is a pillared structure that is open on all sides and protects the person(s) inside from the sun with a roof. By definition, as of the 20th century, mándapas, as temporary structures, are built inside a house or a building and serve as recitation platform during remembrance ceremonies for the dead.
     Built by King Nissanka Malla (1187-1196) and named after him, it is located near the western entrance of the Dalada Maluva, the area that contains the oldest and most sacred monuments in the city. A nearby stone inscription identifies this as the building used by Nissanka Malla to listen to pirith (chanting of Buddhist scriptures).[1]

The structure is an elevated stone platform with a number of stone columns and surrounded by a low stone wall. These stone columns are the unique feature about the Nissanka Latha Manadapaya, since they are carved in a manner that is found nowhere else in the country. The eight granite columns are arranged in two rows, with four in each row.[2] Presumably used to support a roof,[3] each of them is approximately 8 feet 4 inches (2.54 m) in height. In each of these columns, the crown is carved in the shape of a blossoming lotus bud. The rest of the column is elaborately carved to resemble the stem of the flower.[4] Unlike stone columns commonly seen in the architecture of this period, these are not straight, but are curved in three places. According to archaeologist Senarath Paranavithana, the stone columns at the Nissanka Latha Mandapaya are the best examples of this feature of ancient Sri Lankan architecture.[2]

At the center of the platform, flanked by the stone columns, appears a small stupa. This is also made from stone, but the top part of it has been destroyed. Its base is decorated with a carved design. The platform is surrounded by a stone railing. The structure is entered through a single stone doorway. In contrast to the elaborately carved stone pillars, these have an undecorated and plain finish.



Lankatilaka Vihara (Sinhala: ලංකාතිලක විහාරය) is a Buddhist temple situated in Udunuwara of Kandy, Sri Lanka. It is located on Daulagala road approximately 4 km (2.5 mi) away from Pilimatalawa junction and a few kilometres from the buddhist temple, Gadaladeniya Vihara. It is considered as the most magnificent architectural edifice created during the Gampola era 
     The history of the temple goes back to the 14th century. According to historical reports this temple was built by King Bhuvanekabahu IV, who reigned from 1341 to 1351 A. D.[4] He entrusted the construction of this temple to his Chief Minister named Senalankadhikara, who successfully finished the works of this temple. The architecture of the temple was designed by a South Indian architect named Sathapati Rayar.[5] According to the Professor Senarath Paranavithana, Sathapati Rayar designed this temple using Tamil Pandya sculptors brought from Tamil Nadu in Hindu style.. in 13th century AD. Polonnaruwa era and also with other Dravidian and Indo Chinese architectural patterns.



Statue of Parakramabahu I, located near the Pothgul Vehera in Polonnaruwa is a stone sculpture dating back to the Polonnaruwa period of ancient Sri Lanka. Its identity is uncertain, although the widely accepted theory is that it is a statue of Parakramabahu I. However, it has also been suggested as the statue of a sage. Carved on a large boulder, the statue depicts a majestic figure with a grave expression, holding a book or yoke in his hands.
   The statue was built presumably in the 12th century, during the reign of Parakramabahu I. The statue of Parakramabahu I is one of the best stone sculptures belonging to the Polonnaruwa period.[3][4] The 11-foot-2-inch-high (3.40 m) statue is carved in high relief on a large boulder, with full use being made of its height.[5] Its upper body is bare except for a single thread worn over the left shoulder.[6] A long object is held in the hands.[4] The statue's face carries a grave expression, with half-closed eyes, a high forehead, a long beard and a moustache. The shoulders of the statue are rounded, suggesting "extraordinary strength". The right leg is relaxed with the right knee bent forward slightly. The left leg carries the weight of the body, while the hip is also slightly inclined to the left. According to archaeologist Senarath Paranavitana, this statue is "the very embodiment of strength, majesty and dignity"



Thivanka Pilimage had been built by King Parakramabahu (1153-1186) as part of the Jethavanarama Complex. Since the large image of Buddha has been curved in 3 places, this has been given the name “Thivanka” which literally means three curves. As most other structures of this era,  this is too built with bricks including the statue.

The Buddha statue at the Thivanka Pilimage is about 8 meters in height but today the part of the statue above the head has been destroyed. The statue as at today is 6.6 metres tall. The building is 133 feet long and 67.6” feet wide. The walls are 7-12 feet thick making the internal size of the building much smaller.
       The inside walls of the buildings has been decorated with frescoes showing the Jataka Stories (prior births of Buddha before enlightenment) although most of the masonry has been destroyed, the colorful drawings can be still seen on the areas where masonry is intact. The entrance to the building consists of two guard stones and two “Korawak Gala”

The outer restoration of the this image house has been carried out at a snail pace for the last 15 years and has been covered with shuttering though out the this period.

Alternative names : Thivanka Pilima Ge, Thivanka Pilimage, Tivanka Pilima Ge, Tivanka Pilimage, Thiwanka Pilima Ge, Thiwanka Pilimage


The Pokuna or the baths found at Polonnaruwa are comparatively of modest dimensions. The architecturally perfect Kumara pokuna found close to King Parakramabahu’s palace, the pokuna found near the rest house and believed to be that of King Nissanka malla, the austere baths of the Alahana pirivena are some examples.

Yet a jewel of the pokuna architecture lies hidden along the lonely road to the northern city, well away from the bus loads of pilgrims and tourists that crowd Polonnaruwa’s more famous quadrangle packed with ruins from different dynasties differing in architecture and style.

The Nelum pokuna or the Lotus bath is a small stone bath of completely unique design, built in tiers of eight petalled lotuses in descending form.

The fine cut granite is in excellent formation and an absolute delight to the modern day tourist. The atmosphere of garden-like surroundings with its ancient flowering trees enhance its magnificence.

The chronicle speaks of a lotus bath among many ponds constructed by Parakramabahu the Great. It is believed to be the bath provided by the King for the monks belonging to the Jetavana Vihara.

The Archaeological Commissioner describing this granite marvel in his annual Report for 1990 says that the artistic conception of the stone bath is worthy of all praise.

He requests the reader to imagine a gigantic lotus flower of granite in full bloom 24 ft. 9 in. diameter, with five concentric laminae of eight petals, gradually diminishing to a stamen 5 ft. 4 in. across.

Then decide to reverse nature’s order and instead of the convex shape depress the petal rings into concavity 4ft. 6 in. depth and we have the granite lotus bath as it exits in all its shapeliness to this day.

Most tourist miss this site. But if you are lucky to visit it on a quiet evening or early morning it is a spot of great romance which will beckon you every time you visit Polonnaruwa.
